
---
title: "Reflective Memo"
description: "A reflection on what I learned about Professional and Technical Writing."
date: 2025-12-03
---

#### Introduction
This memorandum addresses the learning outcomes of my participation in the Professional and Technical Writing course at the University of New Mexico. I address how each of the outcomes was accomplished and cite specific examples from my <a href="./">final portfolio</a>. I also discuss the relevance of these outcomes in the modern workplace and how the lessons learned during this semester have prepared me for a successful career. The variety of mediums and topics I addressed during the course of the semester gave me the chance to explore and gain experience creating professional content in novel scenarios. This experience will serve as a foundation for my career as a professional computer scientist and software engineer.

#### Project Planning
Before composing my response letter, I had it in mind to strike a balance between accepting responsibility for some of the issues raised and deflecting for some other issues. I made the decision about which issues to accept responsibility for based on what seemed plausible to me given a reasonable representative of an average corporation. To research the response, I reviewed previous letters I have received from companies I've worked for as well as *Technical Communications Today*, which includes a chapter on formal letters, emails, memos and texts (chapter 6). The content in *Technical Communications Today* helped me format the letter and provided general guidelines to craft the response. Project planning was critical for all of the projects I completed during this semester, and I found that many of my challenges arose from having an ambiguous or incomplete plan. Encountering these difficulties helped underline the important of good planning in crafting successful professional content.
#### Project Analysis
I'm particularly familiar with the audience for my response letter as I took the example directly from my experiences with an employer. In that way, the letter was directly addressed to myself and my coworkers at that company, with a secondary audience of the managers that I have some knowledge of but more limited interaction. My previous communications with this company were helpful sources to model my response after, in particular the company-wide memos sent by managers. The company-wide memos are an interesting example where some are clearly intended more for an audience of other managers despite being addressed to the entire company. Most employees access these messages on their phones on lunch break or other breaks in the workday, and as such the most useful and impactful portions of the messages are not the careful composed prose but rather the explicit statement of new policies or details of upcoming work. I see the response that I authored as addressing all of employees of the company and accepting responsibility for some project management failures while simultaneously pushing back against some complaints.
#### Content Development
When crafting my formal response letter, I had a chance to work within the confines a specific genre. The conventions of the formal response letter genre suggest that the letter should be about one page, long enough to address all of the concerns while not so long that it would take more than 5 or so minutes to read. Additionally, a formal response letter features a particular kind of formatting including masthead, salutations, and signature. The genre conventions also indicate a formal tone which contains clear, personal statements while maintaining close cohesion with the organization as a whole. The primary contextual information used in the response was about the complaints raised and the company's history and actions in dealing with similar problems. The specialized information here was about the skills and equipment that are used in demolishing a radar dome, in particular the process involved in disposing of a large quantity of steel. The context of the letter was not to address the specific steps required to dispose of the steel, but rather to address the management processes which failed to properly prepare for and handle the situation.
#### Organizational Design
To create an instructional video, I chose a topic which I'm quite familiar with, coiling a rope, as I have been climbing for about 17 years. The additional research that I performed was to look for additional techniques in books on sailing, since I'm not familiar with that field and they also deal with ropes a lot. I also wanted to clarify the most commonly used names for the techniques, for example the nail bight finish, which I think is a less ambiguous term than the one I've used in the past. I used *Freedom of the Hills*, a classic mountaineering book, as well as the UNM library of sailing books. The proposal and presentation of the Gainzville fitness app that I created gave me a chance to research a specific economic market and support the proposal with that research. This was a great opportunity to learn how to fit my personal and professional goals with the objectives of an audience by finding common ground and substantiating my claims with references to research.
#### Written Communication
To construct the dialog in my instructional video, I decided to use a casual, instructive tone. In my first draft, I included information describing the criteria you would use to choose between the techniques I was presenting. My motivation here was to give the audience a few different techniques they could use, since there's no one right way to coil a rope. Once I started filming though, it became clear that covering all of the techniques I wanted to would exceed the 5 minute goal by quite a bit. I decided to limit the techniques, and this avoided the necessity of covering the criteria at the outset. I still made a point of highlighting the advantages of the techniques, but I mentioned these as they came up rather than at the outset in a more formal manner. Furthermore, by directly addressing the learning outcomes of the course in this memorandum, I had to synthesize the experience I had working on particular projects and tasks to address big picture objectives.
#### Visual Communication
The primary visual for my instruction video was a recorded video. Because the techniques I demonstrated involve some fine motor actions, I combined wide angle shots of the process with close-ups where it's important to see a particular strand of the rope or movement of the hands. I used a single, continuous shot including the narration, highlighted by close-ups, in order to maintain a clear order of events of not confuse the viewer by jumping around too much. Another project that gave me the chance to practice my visual communication was the presentation of the Gainzville fitness app. I used pictures and videos to demonstrate the design and functionality of the app as well as short, written cues to organize and structure the presentation. That project was a great exercise in finding the right balance of how much content to include on a given slide or section of the presentation: too little leaves the audience without visual anchors for the presentation, but too much is confusing and distracting.
#### Reviewing and Editing
In revising the first draft of my app proposal, I focused on describing the goals in greater detail rather than just the objectives. It was easy for me to omit the goals because they feel self-evident, but I think it's important to make these explicit and describe how the objectives of the proposal meet those goals. After reviewing preliminary versions of my presentation, I realized that I needed a more coherent pitch to connect my app to the demonstrated market needs. I edited the structure of my presentation to focus on three market dynamics I identified during my research: AI-driven personalization, wearable tech integration, and an increasing focus on preventive health and wellness. This process of reviewing and editing created a more compelling pitch by connecting the idea and the potential to the potential market.

#### Content Management
The website created to house this memorandum and the rest of my final portfolio gave me the chance to organize a variety of different media types including an instructional video, a formal response letter, a project proposal, and a presentation. By hosting this website on Netlify and creating it using the static site generation library Astro, I got experience with widely used and modern techniques for creating fast, SEO-compatible web content and hosting it. By examining examples of project proposals and applying those concepts to create the proposal for the Gainzville app, I learned about creating an information architecture to organize and present a complex topic. Breaking down this proposal into self-sufficient sections and addressing the goals set out for that proposal, I learned how to see my project through the audiences lens and address the concerns and questions that an audience brings with them.
#### Production and Delivery
The written proposal for my Gainzville app felt much easier in a way because it relied mostly on writing which is incredibly flexible. Presentation is a much more dynamic medium which necessitates a good story, tight transitions, and engaging material. To create the presentation I focused on staying close to the core goals and value proposition by describing the problem and how the app is a solution. Keeping things tight to keep the viewer engaged takes a lot of discipline and care as it's easy to lose the plot and the interest of the viewer. A compelling story is a great way to accomplish this and with that in mind I focused on a clear, understandable problem and how the app solves that problem. I'm proud of the professionalism of the proposal and I think the outline of the objectives is clear and well-scoped for specific project. Explaining the goals of the project and connecting them to the objectives was an important step in creating a compelling proposal.